[dtensor][debug] Creating recipe allowing users to learn how CommDebugMode works and use visual browser (#2993)
pytorch/tutorials: recipes_source/distributed_comm_debug_mode.rst

Using CommDebugMode
=====================================================

**Author**: `Anshul Sinha <https://github.com/sinhaanshul>`__

> Prerequisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerequisites
------------------
```

> - `Distributed Communication Package - torch.distributed <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/distributed.html>`__

Reviewer: I think it's included with PyTorch, so we probably don't need to state this explicitly?

- Python 3.8 - 3.11

> - PyTorch 2.2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PyTorch 2.2 or later
```

What is CommDebugMode and why is it useful

> ------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------------------------------

```

As the size of models continues to increase, users are seeking to leverage various combinations
of parallel strategies to scale up distributed training. However, the lack of interoperability
between existing solutions poses a significant challenge, primarily due to the absence of a
unified abstraction that can bridge these different parallelism strategies. To address this

> issue, PyTorch has proposed DistributedTensor(DTensor) which abstracts away the complexities of

Reviewer: link to https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/distributed.tensor.parallel.html ?

tensor communication in distributed training, providing a seamless user experience. However,
this abstraction creates a lack of transparency that can make it challenging for users to
identify and resolve issues. To address this challenge, CommDebugMode, a Python context manager
will serve as one of the primary debugging tools for DTensors, enabling users to view when and

> why collective operations are happening when using DTensors, addressing this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
why collective operations are happening when using DTensors, effectively addressing this issue.
```

How to use CommDebugMode

> ------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------------

```

> Using CommDebugMode and getting its output is very simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is how you can use ``CommDebugMode``:
```

.. code-block:: python

    comm_mode = CommDebugMode()
        with comm_mode:
            output = model(inp)

    # print the operation level collective tracing information
    print(comm_mode.generate_comm_debug_tracing_table(noise_level=0))

    # log the operation level collective tracing information to a file
    comm_mode.log_comm_debug_tracing_table_to_file(
        noise_level=1, file_name="transformer_operation_log.txt"
    )

    # dump the operation level collective tracing information to json file,
    # used in the visual browser below
    comm_mode.generate_json_dump(noise_level=2)

>     """
>     This is what the output looks like for a MLPModule at noise level 0
>     Expected Output:
>         Global
>           FORWARD PASS
>             *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
>             MLPModule
>               FORWARD PASS
>                 *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
>                 MLPModule.net1
>                 MLPModule.relu
>                 MLPModule.net2
>                   FORWARD PASS
>                     *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
>     """

Reviewer: This sounds like a separate output to me not the part, you want users to copy paste?
```suggestion

 This is what the output looks like for a MLPModule at noise level 0:
 
 .. code-block:: bash
    Expected Output:
        Global
          FORWARD PASS
            *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
            MLPModule
              FORWARD PASS
                *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
                MLPModule.net1
                MLPModule.relu
                MLPModule.net2
                  FORWARD PASS
                    *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
```

> All users have to do is wrap the code running the model in CommDebugMode and call the API that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use ``CommDebugMode`, you must wrap the code running the model in ``CommDebugMode`` and call the API that
```

> they want to use to display the data. One important thing to note is that the users can use a noise_level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you want to use to display the data. You can also use a ``noise_level``
```

> arguement to control how much information is displayed to the user. The information below shows what each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
argument to control the verbosity level of displayed information. Here is what each
```

> noise level displays

Reviewer: ```suggestion
noise level displays:
```

> | 0. prints module-level collective counts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 0. Prints module-level collective counts
```

> | 1. prints dTensor operations not included in trivial operations, module information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1. Prints ``dTensor`` operations not included in trivial operations, module information
```

> | 2. prints operations not included in trivial operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 2. Prints the operations that are not included in trivial operations
```

> | 3. prints all operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 3. Prints all operations
```

> In the example above, users can see in the first picture that the collective operation, all_reduce, occurs

Reviewer: Should there be an image?
```suggestion
In the example above, you can see in the first picture that the collective operation, ``all_reduce``, occurs
```

> once in the forward pass of the MLPModule. The second picture provides a greater level of detail, allowing

Reviewer: There should be an image again?
```suggestion
once in the forward pass of the ``MLPModule``. The second picture provides a greater level of detail, allowing
```

> users to pinpoint that the all-reduce operation happens in the second linear layer of the MLPModule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you to pinpoint that the all-reduce operation happens in the second linear layer of the ``MLPModule``.
```

                padding: 0px;
                text-align: center;
            }
            .drag-drop-block {
                display: inline-block;
                width: 200px;
                height: 50px;
                background-color: #f7f7f7;
                border: 1px solid #ccc;
                border-radius: 5px;
                padding: 10px;
                font-size: 14px;
                color: #666;
                cursor: pointer;
            }
            #file-input {
                position: absolute;
                top: 0;
                left: 0;
                width: 100%;
                height: 100%;
                opacity: 0;
            }
        </style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div id="drop-area">
            <div class="drag-drop-block">
              <span>Drag file here</span>
            </div>
            <input type="file" id="file-input" accept=".json">
          </div>
        <div id="tree-container"></div>
        <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/pytorch/pytorch@main/torch/distributed/_tensor/debug/comm_mode_broswer_visual.js"></script>
    </body>
    </html>

Conclusion
------------------------------------------

> In conclusion, we have learned how to use CommDebugMode in order to debug Distributed Tensors

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this recipe, we have learned how to use ``CommDebugMode`` to debug Distributed Tensors.
```

> and can use future json dumps in the embedded visual browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use your own JSON outputs in the embedded visual browser.
```

> For more detailed information about CommDebugMode, please see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more detailed information about ``CommDebugMode``, see
```

> https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/main/torch/distributed/_tensor/examples/comm_mode_features_example.py

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`comm_mode_features_example.py
< https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/main/torch/distributed/_tensor/examples/comm_mode_features_example.py>`__
```

Using CommDebugMode
=====================================================

**Author**: `Anshul Sinha <https://github.com/sinhaanshul>`__

Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 - 3.11
- PyTorch 2.2 or later

What is CommDebugMode and why is it useful
------------------------------------------
As the size of models continues to increase, users are seeking to leverage various combinations
of parallel strategies to scale up distributed training. However, the lack of interoperability
between existing solutions poses a significant challenge, primarily due to the absence of a
unified abstraction that can bridge these different parallelism strategies. To address this
issue, PyTorch has proposed `DistributedTensor(DTensor)
<https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/blob/main/torch/distributed/_tensor/examples/comm_mode_features_example.py>`_
which abstracts away the complexities of tensor communication in distributed training,

> providing a seamless user experience. However, this abstraction creates a lack of transparency

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
providing a seamless user experience. However, when dealing with existing parallelism solutions and developing parallelism solutions using the unified abstraction like DTensor, the lack of transparency about what and when the collective communications happens under the hood could make it challenging for advanced users to identify and resolve issues.
```

that can make it challenging for users to identify and resolve issues. To address this challenge,
``CommDebugMode``, a Python context manager will serve as one of the primary debugging tools for
DTensors, enabling users to view when and why collective operations are happening when using DTensors,
effectively addressing this issue.

How to use CommDebugMode
------------------------

Here is how you can use ``CommDebugMode``:

.. code-block:: python

    comm_mode = CommDebugMode()
        with comm_mode:

>             output = model(inp)

Reviewer 2: maybe explain a bit in the comment that `model` here could be a MLP model that applied TP?

    # log the operation level collective tracing information to a file
    comm_mode.log_comm_debug_tracing_table_to_file(
        noise_level=1, file_name="transformer_operation_log.txt"
    )

    # dump the operation level collective tracing information to json file,
    # used in the visual browser below
    comm_mode.generate_json_dump(noise_level=2)

.. code-block:: python

    """
    This is what the output looks like for a MLPModule at noise level 0
    Expected Output:
        Global
          FORWARD PASS
            *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
            MLPModule
              FORWARD PASS
                *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
                MLPModule.net1
                MLPModule.relu
                MLPModule.net2
                  FORWARD PASS
                    *c10d_functional.all_reduce: 1
    """

To use ``CommDebugMode``, you must wrap the code running the model in ``CommDebugMode`` and call the API that
you want to use to display the data. You can also use a ``noise_level`` argument to control the verbosity
level of displayed information. Here is what each noise level displays:

| 0. Prints module-level collective counts

> | 1. Prints dTensor operations not included in trivial operations, module information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 1. Prints DTensor operations (not including trivial operations), module sharding information
```

> | 2. Prints operations not included in trivial operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 2. Prints tensor operations (not including trivial operations)
```

| 3. Prints all operations

In the example above, you can see that the collective operation, all_reduce, occurs once in the forward pass

> of the ``MLPModule``. Furthermore, you can use ``CommDebugMode`` pinpoint that the all-reduce operation happens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the ``MLPModule``. Furthermore, you can use ``CommDebugMode`` to pinpoint that the all-reduce operation happens
```

in the second linear layer of the ``MLPModule``.

> Below is the interactive module tree visualization that users can upload their JSON dump to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the interactive module tree visualization that you can use to upload your own JSON dump:
```

                padding: 0px;
                text-align: center;
            }
            .drag-drop-block {
                display: inline-block;
                width: 200px;
                height: 50px;
                background-color: #f7f7f7;
                border: 1px solid #ccc;
                border-radius: 5px;
                padding: 10px;
                font-size: 14px;
                color: #666;
                cursor: pointer;
            }
            #file-input {
                position: absolute;
                top: 0;
                left: 0;
                width: 100%;
                height: 100%;
                opacity: 0;
            }
        </style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div id="drop-area">
            <div class="drag-drop-block">
              <span>Drag file here</span>
            </div>
            <input type="file" id="file-input" accept=".json">
          </div>
        <div id="tree-container"></div>
        <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/pytorch/pytorch@main/torch/distributed/_tensor/debug/comm_mode_broswer_visual.js"></script>
    </body>
    </html>

Conclusion
------------------------------------------

> In this recipe, we have learned how to use ``CommDebugMode`` to debug Distributed Tensors. You can use your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this recipe, we have learned how to use ``CommDebugMode`` to debug Distributed Tensors and parallelism solutions that uses communication collectives with PyTorch
```

Using CommDebugMode
=====================================================

**Author**: `Anshul Sinha <https://github.com/sinhaanshul>`__

> Prerequisites
> 
> - Python 3.8 - 3.11
> - PyTorch 2.2 or later
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this tutorial, we will explore how to use CommDebugMode with PyTorch's DistributedTensor (DTensor) for debugging by tracking collective operations in distributed training environments.

Prerequisites
---------------------
* Python 3.8 - 3.11
* PyTorch 2.2 or later

```

Using CommDebugMode
=====================================================

**Author**: `Anshul Sinha <https://github.com/sinhaanshul>`__

> In this tutorial, we will explore how to use CommDebugMode with PyTorch's DistributedTensor (DTensor) for debugging by tracking collective operations in distributed training environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will explore how to use CommDebugMode with PyTorch's
DistributedTensor (DTensor) for debugging by tracking collective operations in distributed training environments.
```
